Add pages + functions (#2724)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: products/pages/src/content/platform/functions.md

---
order: 6
pcx-content-type: concept
---

> # Functions
> With Pages, you can now build full-stack applications by executing code on the Cloudflare network with help from [Cloudflare Workers](https://workers.cloudflare.com/). Functions enable you to run server-side code to enable dynamic functionality without running a dedicated server. With Functions, you can introduce application aspects  such as authenticating, querying databases, handling form submissions, or working with middleware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Functions

With Pages, you can now build full-stack applications by executing code on the Cloudflare network with help from [Cloudflare Workers](https://workers.cloudflare.com/). Functions enable you to run server-side code to enable dynamic functionality without running a dedicated server. With Functions, you can introduce application aspects such as authenticating, querying databases, handling form submissions, or working with middleware.
```

 
## Built with Cloudflare Workers
 
Cloudflare Workers provides a serverless [execution environment](https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/serverless/what-is-serverless/) that allows you to create entirely new applications or augment existing ones without configuring or maintaining infrastructure. 
 
Previously, you could only add dynamic functionality to your Pages site by manually deploying a Worker using Wrangler, which meant that your application is written across both Pages and Workers. Functions allow you to leverage the Workers platform directly from within a Pages project by utilizing a project’s filesystem convention. This enables you to deploy your entire site – both its static and dynamic content – when you `git push`. 
 
## Setup
 

> To get started, you’ll need to create a `/functions` directory at the root of your project. Writing your functions files in this directory will automatically generate a Worker with custom functionality at the predesignated routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, create a `/functions` directory at the root of your project. Writing your functions files in this directory will automatically generate a Worker with custom functionality at the predesignated routes.
```

> ## Functions routing
> Using a `/functions` directory will generate a routing table based on the files present in the directory. You may use JavaScript (`*.js`) or TypeScript (`*.ts`) to write your Functions. We declare a `PagesFunction` type in the [@cloudflare/workers-types](https://github.com/cloudflare/workers-types) library which you can use to type-check your Functions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Functions routing

Using a `/functions` directory will generate a routing table based on the files present in the directory. You may use JavaScript (`*.js`) or TypeScript (`*.ts`) to write your Functions. A `PagesFunction` type is declared in the [@cloudflare/workers-types](https://github.com/cloudflare/workers-types) library which you can use to type-check your Functions. 
```

 
For example, assume this directory structure:
 
```
├── ...
├── functions
|   └── api
│       ├── [[path]].ts
│       ├── [username]
│       │   └── profile.ts
│       ├── time.ts
│       └── todos
│           ├── [[path]].ts
│           ├── [id].ts
│           └── index.ts
└── ...
```
 
The following routes will be generated based on the file structure, mapping the URL pattern to the `/functions` file that will be invoked:
 
```
/api/time => ./functions/time.ts
/api/todos => ./functions/todos/index.ts
/api/todos/* => ./functions/todos/[id].ts
/api/todos/*/** => ./functions/todos/[[path]].ts
/*/profile => ./functions/[username]/profile.ts
/** => ./functions/[[path]].ts
```
 

> ### Path segments
> Note that in the example above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Path segments

Note that in the example above:
```

> * A `*` denotes a placeholder for a single path segment (e.g. /todos/123)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A `*` denotes a placeholder for a single path segment (for example, `/todos/123`)
```

> * A `**` matches one or more path segments (e.g. /todos/123/dates/confirm). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A `**` matches one or more path segments (for example, `/todos/123/dates/confirm`). 
```

When naming your files:
* `[name]` is a placeholder for a single path segment
* `[[name]]` matches any depth of route below this point

When a filename includes a placeholder, the `name` must be alphanumeric and cannot contain spaces. In turn, the URL segment(s) that match the placeholder will be available under the `context.params` object using the filename placeholder as the key.

<Aside type=”note” header=”Route Specificity”> 

> More specific routes (i.e. those with fewer wildcards) take precedence over less specific routes.
> </Aside>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More specific routes (that is, those with fewer wildcards) take precedence over less specific routes.

</Aside>
```

### KV namespace

Workers KV is Cloudflare’s globally replicated key-value storage solution. Within Pages, you can choose from the list of KV namespaces that you created from within the Workers dashboard. You can find [instructions to do this here](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/platform/environment-variables#adding-kv-namespace-bindings-via-the-dashboard). Once your binding is created in the Workers dashboard, navigate to your project’s Settings > Functions within Pages, and select the namespace from the dropdown. Then set a name for your binding. 

![KV-Binding](KV-functions.png)

### Durable Object namespace

Durable Objects are Cloudflare’s strongly consistent coordination primitive that makes connecting WebSockets, handling state, and building entire applications a breeze. As with Workers KV, you first have to [create the Durable Object](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/learning/using-durable-objects#uploading-a-durable-object-worker) and then you can configure it as a binding to your Pages project. Navigate to the Pages interface in **Settings** > **Functions** to select the namespace and set a name. 

![DO-Binding](DO-functions.png)

> ### Environment variable

Reviewer 2: I'd maybe note that secrets cannot be set currently.
